China-US ties entering a more delicate period



The sixth State of the Union address of US President Barack Obama deepened the political divide in Washington, which now reflects the country's economic divide and which, in turn, will reflect across the US foreign policy, including US-China relations, in the coming years.



Intriguingly, Obama mentioned China explicitly barely three times in his speech: in the context of the US' trade in Asia, jobs in America, and the climate deal signed with Beijing in November.



While the new climate targets have further divided US Congress, Obama's "pivot to Asia" policy has polarized US-China relations in Asia. China sees the "pivot" as a containment policy by another name, and Obama's view is very different: "China wants to write the rules for the world's fastest-growing region. That would put our workers and businesses at a disadvantage ... We should write those rules."



These remarks reflect the US president's efforts to speed up the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, which includes several major Asian economies (but excludes China), ASEAN member states, Latin American countries, and members of the North American Free Trade Agreement (US, Canada and Mexico).



At the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation week in Beijing in November, China advocated a Free Trade Area of Asia-Pacific, a plan which was initially developed in Washington and which would include the US and China both. Nevertheless, US Trade Representative Michael Froman is seeking the support of US Congress for the TPP, for which Obama will ask for trade promotion authority.



The White House seeks to avoid a double-whammy, that is, the scenario in which Obama fails to complete the TPP in Asia or the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership in Europe, or both. Since this would effectively undermine Obama's legacy, the US administration is pushing aggressively both deals - at the expense of substantial dilution in the final agreements.



On economic and trade issues, the subtext of bilateral relations has shifted thanks to China's reforms, the rapid rise of Chinese foreign direct investment in the US and efforts to accelerate innovation-led competitiveness. Instead of these areas of progress, Obama's State of the Union address made implicit allusions to China, particularly in context of cyber threats. And although there has been some progress in military-to-military ties on the bilateral security front, deep bilateral differences remain over cyber activities.



As Obama put it: "No foreign nation, no hacker, should be able to shut down our networks, steal our trade secrets, or invade the privacy of American families." Washington sees itself as a victim of "commercial theft", while Beijing and many other countries, even US allies, believe they are under incessant cyber intrusions conducted by the US National Security Agency.



In 2014, bilateral optimism climaxed at Beijing, where Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping reiterated their commitments to fulfilling the new China-US emission targets. But while China may stick to its climate pledge, the Sino-US deal is leading to a political showdown between Obama and the Republican Congress.



In the third quarter of 2014, US growth intensified to 5 percent, the strongest in 11 years. But despite all the rhetoric about "austerity" and "rebalancing", the US' debt burden today exceeds \$18 trillion, which makes it almost \$1 trillion more than US' GDP despite the Federal Reserve's lifeline of $4.5 trillion over the past half a decade.



As Obama will leave the White House in two years, US growth will steadily decelerate to 2.3 percent by 2020. In contrast, China's real GDP growth is likely to remain around 7 percent in 2015 and decelerate to only 5 to 6 percent by the end of the 2010s. And since the US' growth is fueled by foreign investment, the US dollar as the de facto global currency and an unsustainable debt burden, this overstretch will come under increasing pressure in the latter half of the 2010s.



Given the above facts, Beijing must prepare for a more divided Washington, mixed policy messages and potentially confrontational policies from the US in the post-Obama era.

